# 20.440_ClassProject
## Identifying risk biomarkers for future ischemic stroke using scRNA-seq mouse brain vascular transcriptomes

## Overview
This repository contains code, data, and figures related to the Spring 2022 MIT 20.440 Class Project between investigators Kimberly Bennett and Chau Vo. This project aims to identify highly regulatory hub genes within mouse brain vasculature transcriptome to predict the disregulation of genes in human brain ischemic stroke and thus identify potential biomarkers for predicting future ischemic stroke. We hypothesize that the disruption of highly regulatory genes in healthy vasculature are drivers of ischemic stroke pathology, and that these genes can be used to predict the onset of ischemic stroke. If successful, this project will provide the foundation for a method to predict human ischemic stroke and eventually allow for this biomarker to be regularly screened for in susceptible patients.

*__Note for PSET4__: To recreate the PSET4 figure of a heatmap of gene expression (Heatmap.png) found in the Figures folder, download the dataset titled **E-GEOD-98816.aggregated_filtered_normalised_counts.mtx** in the **Data** folder and the related code in the format of your choosing (Juptyer Notebook or Python Script) found in the **Code** Folder. The heatmap is a preliminary rendition of gene expression (in counts per millions (cpm)) of the top 500 genes with the smallest p-value amongst all cell samples, and further refinement will include specifications of which samples correspond to what type of cell source.*

## Data
Data was not generated by the investigators of this project and all data files were sourced from the EMBL-EBI database: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc/experiments/E-GEOD-98816/results/tsne. The original study that generated this data by Vanlandewijck et al can be found here: https://europepmc.org/article/MED/29443965

3186 single cell samples from mouse brain vasculature were collected under animal experiment protocol approved by the Uppsala Ethical Committee on Animal Research and the Stockholm North Animal Ethics committee. Perivascular (PdgfraH2BGFP-positive) cells, Brain mural cells (Pdgfrb-GFP/Cspg4-DsRed positive) and brain endothelial cells (Cldn5-GFP positive) were isolated and single-cell libraries were prepared to generate the transcriptome data. All single-cell transcriptome data were generated at the Eukaryotic Singlecell Genomics facility at Science for Life Laboratory in Stockholm, Sweden. After cell type classification, the edgeR method was applied to compare the gene expression differences of 28336 genes between cells. **Within our code, the top 500 genes with the smallest p-value by one-way ANOVA (calculated by Valandewijck et al) were used to generate the figure for PSET4.**

> Vanlandewijck M, et al. A molecular atlas of cell types and zonation in the brain vasculature. Nature. 2018 Feb; 554(7693):475-480. DOI: 10.1038/nature25739. PMID: 29443965.

## Folder structure
The following folders and their contents can be found in this repository:
### Data
-   Original file of Normalised Counts of mouse gene expression across cell samples in ascending order of smallest p-value [**E-GEOD-98816.aggregated_filtered_normalised_counts.mtx**](https://github.com/kr-bennett/20.440_ClassProject/blob/main/Data/E-GEOD-98816.aggregated_filtered_normalised_counts.mtx}
-   Original file containing clusters of mouse vasculature genes with similar expression patterns [**Vasculature_Clustering_File.csv**](https://github.com/kr-bennett/20.440_ClassProject/blob/main/Data/Vasculature_Clustering_File.tsv) [*Currently not in use but uploaded for future use*]
-   *Files of human ischemic stroke transcriptome data will be uploaded at a later point*
### Code
-   Juptyer Notebooks Code for a preliminary version of a figure needed for PSET 4 [**Bennett_Kimberly_pset4code.ipynb**](https://github.com/kr-bennett/20.440_ClassProject/blob/main/Code/Bennett_Kimberly_pset4code.ipynb)
-   Python Script for a preliminary version of a figure needed for PSET 4 [**Bennett_Kimberly_pset4code.py**](https://github.com/kr-bennett/20.440_ClassProject/blob/main/Code/Bennett_Kimberly_pset4code.py)
### Figures
-   Preliminary figure of a Heatmap of gene expression of the top 500 genes across 3186 cell samples [**Heatmap.png**](https://github.com/kr-bennett/20.440_ClassProject/blob/main/Figures/Heatmap.png) [*generated for PSET4*]

## Installation
Code in this repository was completely written by Kimberly Bennett in Python using the Jupyter Notebooks web-based application for Windows and figures were generated with this code. Both python scripts and juptyer notebook files are uploaded for use.

Download Jupyter Notebooks here: https://jupyter.org/

Download PyCharm (for Python in Windows) here: https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download/#section=windows
